# Barriers to Programming

Programming, as it is practiced today, isn't very accessible to a
large portion of the world's population.

There are many barriers of entry to programming. Some are inherent,
such as internalizing semantic models of evaluation, practicing logic
and formalisms.  Many are accidental, e.g: Obscure tools and trivia about
programming languages.

While many are aware of these barriers of entry, one barrier is hiding
in plain sight: Human Languages.

## Lamdu's accessibility

One of the goals of the Lamdu project, is to increase accessibility of
advanced programming. This is partly why Lamdu has immediate-feedback
with [permatypes](), [live code evaluation](), and [WYTIWYS]()
structured editing.

All these, however, do not suffice when the barrier is human
language. Programming languages can be learned to proficiency in
months or sometimes even days. Mastering a human language is a much
larger undertaking.

Most programming languages and libraries are written in English.

This is quite a barrier for people who wish to program in other languages.

People have attempted to tackle this barrier by creating new
[programming
languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-English-based_programming_languages). However,
these will not help programmers use English libraries, or collaborate
with English-speaking programmers.

## Internationalization for programming

What is it that makes a programming language specific to one human
language or another? We can point to these issues, from most important
to least:

* Symbol names in software libraries. To use a library, its API and semantics must be understood. The names

* Direction: Some languages, like Arabic or Hebrew, flow from Right to
  Left. To maintain a natural reading order, the syntactic structure
  of the language should flow in the same direction.

* Programming language keywords: These are hard-coded in English in
  most languages. On the one hand, this is hard to change in
  traditional, textual languages. On the other hand, there aren't that
  many keywords, and learning these, even for non-English speakers, is
  feasible.

* The Programming Environment UI: This one is easy to tackle. Even
  with traditional tools.
